Men versus Women: A Psychological Mystery
-> Nine out of 10 prison inmates are men; among people who are
homeless, men outnumber women by at least three to one; men
are 10 times more likely to commit murder than women are; men
are more likely to show up at the low end of distributions of IQ
scores—they are more likely to be mentally retarded—than women;
and men are more likely to abuse and abandon their children and
less likely to take care of their aging parents than women.
-> On psychological measures of undesirable characteristics, men
outscore women on measures of cruelty, closed-mindedness,
hostility, narcissism, and self-indulgence. Additionally, men die
earlier than women—about fi ve years earlier on average.
-> This is a particularly puzzling picture, given that we normally
assume that men in most societies have it better than women do.
Why would the advantaged gender be so much more maladjusted,
antisocial, and unhealthy? This is an extremely complex issue, and
the experts don’t agree on its answer.
-> First, there may be some evolutionary and biological processes
at play. These differences between men and women can be seen
around the world, and they don’t map easily onto cultural variables.
-> Furthermore, there’s evidence that, for some reason, evolution
operated in such a way that men show greater variability on many
characteristics than women do—more men score at the extremes of
distributions than women do.
-> On average, men are taller than women, but men show more
variability around the average height than women do. We also
see this effect for birth weight. Height and weight are important
examples because they are determined mostly by people’s genes.
-> Biologists disagree about why this occurs, but the phenomenon
appears to be real. This extra variability might explain—at least
in part—why men are more likely to have behavioral and social
problems than women because the fact that men are more variable
than women may naturally lead more men to have problems.
-> Culture might also contribute to the high proportion of men
who have serious problems. Throughout history, men have been
expected to go to war in service to their country—even though
there are more women entering the military than ever before.
Many of the men with serious dysfunctions are veterans who have
experienced psychological problems, have developed addictions, or
have become homeless.